# Meditations on the Blockchain

There's a lot of buzz about blockchains these days. Bitcoins are inflating in value in an unprecedented manner in recent months, though they are merely a proof of concept. The desire for an escape from the limitations of the present financial system is undeniable and is showing itself in the frenzy of interest around this technology. But bitcoins are limited, they don't serve any real purpose aside from demonstrating what a blockchain is and how it can be utilized. Manifestations of the blockchain concept are in their infancy, but utility is already being developed upon them. I'm curious, however, if perhaps the concept is being taken to the wrong extreme in an attempt to create a single blockchain to serve as a monetary platform. Instead, can a vast number of small blockchains serve to replace actual currency?

If we consider the previously discussed concept of data and derived information providing income for the owner of the sensor which provides it or consumer who processed it, each datum itself could serve as the genesis block for a ledger of transactions which track that datum's lineage. When the datum or it's derivation is paid for by a consumer, the income 'flows' backwards to each successive owner in the chain - As an example it could be decided that 4 degrees of separation from a consumer is how far the income flows - the consumer reads the owner of the 4 most recent blocks by getting the parent hash and distributes the payment with a (again for example) 60%/25%/10%/5% split. If it is intrinsic that the split occurs for every transaction, and the remaining income is passed to the block's parent, then even if the block being consumed is the genesis then it will earn the full income, as a genesis block references it's own hash as its parent.

This may be again too extreme - a medium then being every Thing having it's own blockchain. ThingChain has a nice ring to it. Then each datum in a sensor's dataset would be part of a single transactional ledger. Considering that Things are hierarchical compositions of smaller Things, its important to remember that the ownership is not a transitive property, it is defined independently for each ThingChain when it's genesis block is created. Therefore the owner of a large Thing - for example a BuildingThing, does not automatically own the Things inside the building. They *might* own all of them, in which case they would have been set as owner on each of them during transactions in the past. The owner of the BuildingThing in fact owns multiple WallThings, FloorThings, DoorThings, WindowThings.. etc. Each of those are made up of smaller components as well. It is feasible then, that real estate could come down to owning a literal piece of a building - like a single WallThing - which when the building's occupant pays the rent, provides a fractional amount of the value to the WallThing's owner. However they would also cover the maintenance cost when that WallThing needed a new coat of paint!

Since each person is a Thing as well. A PersonThing's ThingChain becomes a transactional ledger of their day to day experiences, biological functions, social interactions, location history, heart rate, work completed and so on. The access level is defined by the PersonThing on a permissive basis like a computer's file system.

The first reaction many people presently have to this idea is outrage; claiming it would be invasive and lead to diminished freedom and autonomy. However technologies such as ATM cards and networks have had the opposite effect; Where previously one would have to withdraw cash from a teller during specific banking hours, now it is easy to retrieve 24/7 with no face-to-face transaction necessary. Data is collected about the transactions which initially served to the consumer's benefit - fraudulent activity was more easily identified and they may even be offered financial incentives for shopping at a particular store. However, somewhat recently the metadata about the transactions became a saleable product in and of itself. It is sold to advertisers, insurance companies and so on. This feels invasive because a 3rd party is earning money for a Person's actions, often without them knowing about it and without a mechanism for educating themselves on exactly how it is used. There is no lineage for the data or transparency on the derivations taken from it; therefore it can be misused, sold, and resold to whomever knows where to buy it.

Credit cards for example, are almost weaponized finance directed at the general public. Admittedly, used in a manageable way they can provide similar advantages as ATMs although generally for a steeper fee. However if used irresponsibly or in emergencies they can quickly diminish one's freedom and lead to harassment from collection agencies, to the point that government stepped in to legislate certain limitations to actions they could take in many countries. In addition to this, there are many examples of credit issuing companies supplementing their income by selling their customer's personal data or changing their accounts/fees without proper notice.

The desire of this system is to prevent such abuse from occurring - to make credit and debt and outdated concept and provide provable experiential ownership from which a base living wage can be derived. An individual can  'opt out' or 'disconnect' by simple non-participation. Turn off the sensors on your things for as short or long of a timespan as they would like. The system continues to provide income to a user as long as their residual data is consumed in any way, if they return it is waiting for them. It is not meant to be intrusive, nor to control behavior or resources - indeed the potential for 'black markets' which use the currency is highly reduced due to its signed/nonanon nature - but it in no way prevents their existence.

The casual black market shopper isn't out looking for ways to harm others, but typically for contraband. If the prohibition of said contraband is not present in other locations, the information derived from it could serve to drive policy reform if it shows a demonstrably positive effect. It also highlights the fact that the prohibitive policies exist on a network-wide scale, which if unjust would serve to their undoing as well. Some prohibition is a good thing as there still are a small few black market shoppers who *are* out to hurt people. As a preventative measure, particular Things could be made to require one or more 'logins' to become active, asserting responsibility on the activator, or checking for specific permissions issued by the owner - like a file on a computer system as mentioned before. In this case responsibility falls on the owner for issuing the permission. This may be achieved through contemporary login interfaces, via signed proximity or other methods which can be explored further at a later time.
