# The Meta-Economy - Data, Technology, Emotion and Creativity as Resources.

## Spatial Data - A Common Dimension

The Earth has a meta-ecosystem which is composed of the data which represent
physical phenomena. Everything which happens, happens at a location - all data
therefore must posess a spatial element. These events may influence one another
either directly or through side-effects which themselves are sub-events with
their own spatial properties, but only if they intersect spatially. 

These metadata describe everything physical, in varying levels of granularity. 
We have sensors which can sense data from individual sub-atomic particles, all
the way up to satellites which can provide data from huge sections of the earth.
Cameras capture data about visible light from wherever their lenses are pointed,
while thermometers give us data about the air temperature at their location.
Some of these sensors also emit their spatial data, although many still do not.

## Sensory Perception

In all of the above examples, the data is sensed by machines which observe and
measure energy which is emitted or reflected by matter. This energy can be
visible light, as in the Camera example, heat energy for thermometers or the
energy released from a collision inside a particle accelerator. We can look at
the electricity which powers sensor machines as the energy which powers data, as
the first comparative metaphor between the data ecosystem and Earth's ecosystem.
The Earth's ecosystem is driven by energy at every level - microbes exist off
energy from the sunlight, or geothermal vents deep in the ocean. Plant life
wouldn't exist without photosynthesis driven by the Sun's energy. Human life
wouldn't exist either, without the chemical energy which powers our muscles and
allows for our heartbeat. Sensors vary in complexity as well, and relatively so
they consume various levels of electricity to function.

Electricity is undoubtedly a form of energy, so it is the property of matter and
data which intersect. As such it is something which can be measured and with
which the measurement can be transmitted. Indeed it is electrical signals within
a nervous system which allows all life - lifeforms being biological sensors
themselves - to percieve all sensory phenomena and process a reaction which may 
enhance their chance of survival.

## Biological Sensors

Life can then draw comparison to the sensors' hardware, as another metaphor for
parallels between the ecosystem and meta-ecosystem. Both lifeforms and sensors
can either be stationary or mobile - and in the latter case either adrift or
purposefully so. Seaweed, ferns and trees take root in a single location, algae
drifts in the ocean, fish swim while animals walk and birds fly. Likewise,
sensors and their 'bodies' vary in complexity and utility. A thermometer might 
be stationary on a windowsill, or mobile on a car. A heart-rate monitor can be
found in both hospital rooms and on smart watches. Cameras can be unblinking 
sentinels watching a parking lot, or take a single snap to capture an 
extraordinary moment, or may even be found adrift on a balloon capturing images
at given intervals as it ascends into the high atmosphere.

In addition to energy, life needs other building blocks. These are found in the
Earth itself and it's atmosphere. Plant life use carbohydrates to form their
structures and as they become more complex also produce proteins, some take in
metals through their roots - spinach is rich in iron, for example. Some produce
fats which serve as rich fertilizer for their seeds, and also an efficient
source of energy for more complex life. They also produce side-effects on the
environment - plants use the Carbon in the Carbon Dioxide in the air and water
to build the carbohydrates in the cell walls. This yields oxygen into the
atmosphere as a result. As lifeforms became more accustomed to this it allowed
for different chemical reactions in their bodies which allowed for further
complexity.

## Senses

These complex life forms often benefit from multiple 'senses' which are 
composed of arrays of biological sensors, mapped to processing units in a 
nervous system. These can be strictly instinctual - reacting to a given input a
certain way without regard to other factors, environmental - reacting to a given
input with respect to the full environment, learned - reacting to a given input 
a certain way with respect to prior results of that reaction, or intelligent -
reacting to a given input with consideration given to multiple probable 
outcomes, with respect to experience and the given environment. Varying
combinations of these behaviors exist across the spectrum of life.

## Mechanical Sensors

Intelligent life can learn a phenomenon well enough to create mechanical sensors
which are created from and housed in complex structural arrangements, allowing
them to percieve dimensions of phenomena outside the limits of human senses, at
widely varying physical and temporal resolutions, positions and perspectives.
These sensors consume data much like life consumes matter. While the sensors
themselves don't grow and utilize energy from the data itself, the value which
that data provides to the consumer of the sensor's signal generally dictates the
funding and therefore rate of growth of the complimentary technologies of which
that particular type of sensor is composed. The bodies of the sensors eventually
were given senses, to allow for better performance of the sensor itself. For
example cameras which auto-focus, or conditionally use the flash with respect to
ambient light. Now cameras mounted on drone helicopters may auto-reposition to
get the best lighting, reacting to real-time environmental conditions.

## Metaphysical Growth

In the meta-ecosystem, data is parallel to matter in Earth's ecosystem. Sensors
consume data and grow in technological complexity, so long as they provide
useful information to intelligent life. In doing so they provide new and
previously unavailable data, just as more primative forms of life altered the
Earth's ecosystem which in turn allowed life as a whole to grow in complexity.
New technologies become available to species of increasing intelligence which
are biologically possible due to the altered ecosystem, creating a feedback loop
which allowed for the human species, which can intelligently design technologies
of a magnitude which can alter the Earth's ecosystem and meta-ecosystem on a
regional or global scale. These phenomena can be either accidental or purposeful
and in and of themselves generate conditions in which new types of physical
phenomena and therefore new types of data can manifest.

## Intelligent Sensors

Intelligence has been mentioned several times in the analogies above, defined as
considering probable outcomes before reacting. Life must have multiple senses to
compare results, if it is to detect patterns and calculate the odds of a
specific phenomena occuring based off the occurance pattern of another phenomena.
If sensors' hardware is analogous to life as a whole, then the software which 
aggregates multiple sensors into a 'sense' and the quality of its reaction with 
respect to a success criteria plays a similar role in the meta-ecosystem's tree
of technological life as intelligence plays in animal life. Software is what 
turns the electrical signals of many sensors into perceptible information, and 
intelligence condenses experience into perception of probable results of 
responses to stimuli which are likely to occur under given environmental
conditions.

This definition of intelligence may conflict with traditional views on the
matter, as it does suggest that most lifeforms are indeed intelligent. It is
important to note that this does not mean that there is an associated emotional
response in most lifeforms, which is an entirely different category of phenomena
than one derived strictly from assessing probabilities. Intelligence in this
context is composed of dimensions of pattern recognition, derivation of
aggregate functions and abstract reasoning capabilities. Emotion as a result of
biochemistry is still a mysterious subject in biology and psychology, and
emotion in technology is in the infancy of research.

## The Elements of Data

Data can be thought of to possess various states, similar to matter. Solid,
liquid and gaseous forms of data exist along the various dimensions it
represents. Crystalized data is 'constant' or 'static' - it has been proven
to be true by logical tests and in its most dense and efficient form. This is
akin to the Earth element. The Water element is represented by data which has
been sensed by a sensor - raw, uncleaned data is akin to salt water, while data
which has been stripped of bad entries and can be processed cleanly is similar
to fresh water. Air is equivalent to data which exists but has not yet been
sensed by a sensor - either because the sensor does not yet exist or the
coverage which it monitors does not extend to that area. Lastly, data which is
presently being utilized is similar to fire. This is the data currently imbued
with the electrical energy which allows it to become mobile across the surface
of technological hardware. Data in RAM, cache and so on is the best example of
data in its fire state. The set of properties a datum posesses (its schema)
defines it's 'weight' and valence potential with other data. 

## Alchemy of Data

Templates for polymorphism/conditional manifestation. Chirality of vectors with
respect to origin. Chemical reactions = side effect information about potential
data synergies. 

## Science of Data

Understanding data to create purposeful side effects of reactions, increasing
speed of crystalization of new data-types, categorization of datum, 
