# Reframing Maps

The colloquial definition of a map limits what the term conceptually represents - Geography and Cartography combined to enable projected, scaled representations of the surface of the earth overlaid with symbology, and often some kind of metainformation in cartographic elements such as projection information, a scale bar or a compass rose. I will refer to these as traditional maps in this paper. Some disciplines expand this idea, star maps in astrology for example flip the concept and map the sky as seen from a position on the surface of the earth. Computer science abstracts the concept further, as it tends to do - mapping data means categorizing data with respect to one or more functions and is vital to the current 'big data' explosion. Map-Reduce is a fundamental element to this, in essence it is an algorithm which describes the process of categorization and the subsequent aggregation of the categories into reduced dimensionality. Additionally, some automated user interface testing frameworks use the concept of a UI map to define regions of the screen which are expected to house an interface element and provides automated interactions, such as mouse clicks or taps based on the expected functionality of the underlying element. The result is tested by generating a result UI map after the functionality occurs, then asserting the regions that are expected to have changed have done so.

These advancements in the concept of a map illustrate that there are indeed several necessary components to a map. These are the observer, perspective, dimensionality, quantization, layout, media and projection. This is presented in an introductory Geography course in college, but only in the context of a traditional map. An enhanced, hierarchical definition of these components is needed to further the discussion of mapping:

 - The observer is the thing which is consuming the map. An observer does not have to be human, just something expecting a map as an input which produces a measurable output - one to many sensors working with one or more processors. The degree to which an observer can successfully interface with a map defines how compatible an observer and map are - in human terms this 'interface' is the observer's understanding, for example someone who can only read English won't interface well with a map labelled in Mandarin Chinese. In computer terms it defines the overlap of the API of the map and observing process.

 - Perspective defines what an observer is, where the observer is in relation to the map and what portion of the map it can see.
   - On a traditional map, the observer's perspective is a certain distance above the surface of the earth (scale) facing either straight down or at an oblique angle(view), and their field of vision (extent).
   - The UI map is from the perspective of a user looking at a screen of a given resolution. The functionality of a UI map element itself is a map, from        the perspective of possible integrations with respect to a defined element.
   - Data mapping is happening from the perspective of a function; a given set of laws on what to do when the data is a certain way. The data may be filtered/masked, limiting the extent of the data or functionality.

- Dimensionality refers to the number of datum present on the map and the properties of the datum which the map represents meaningfully to an observer with respect to it's perspective.
   - On a traditional map the datum is the collective information on the map. Properties include spatial position, symbology and the provided metadata.
   - On a UI map the datum might be the location of elements on an (x,y) plane, the color of the element, the function set and expected result set of the      element and so on.
   - Data mapping has many potential dimensions, from the frequency and precision of the sensor, the spectrum of properties it can process, the functions      available and their efficiency/correctness etc.

- Quantization is the functional ability of the map elements to reduce dimensionality of represented data and present it as meaningful information that   can be consumed by the observer.

- Layout defines how the map elements are represented in relation to one another. It is essentially a meta-map; it does not represent the mapped data itself yet influences the dimensionality and efficiency with which it is delivered to the observer.
  - In data mapping the reduce step is the view, it maps the mapped data into more condensed models which are more efficient for an observer to consume.

- Media is the means through which the map is presented to an observer. Suboptimal media can degrade the efficiency and dimensionality of the map and may introduce corruption of the observer's understanding and thus output.
   - In a traditional map, the media was typically paper or canvas - now more commonly a cell phone screen.
   - In data mapping the media is the hardware: the physical sensor, its components - their physiology and material makeup, the processors - their speed and precision and then either the network hardware, memory or storage etc through which their output is produced.

- The projection is the way through which dimensionality is distorted or flattened to conform to the specifications of the media used to present the map.

You may begin to see that map components are maps in and of themselves and that the idea of a map, when abstracted enough, can define anything. I believe this may be critical in synergizing many concepts and developing a mathematics of synergetic potential/efficiency between defined, non-overlapping domains within a mapped system.

Maps of varying types overlay our perception and understanding of our surroundings. One of the most fundamental and interwoven pairs of maps is a written alphabet and its language. An alphabet provides a human observer the perspective of quantizing the dimensionality of its vocal range, using symbols as views which are written onto, or spoken through various forms of media; from paper to stone to computer screens, songs to radio to chat rooms, projected by the culture which developed them. Language is a map of quantized and aggregated combinations of alphabet symbols which reduce the dimensionality of human-observed phenomenon into a combination of sounds to describe it, which other humans can distinguish from other sounds and take meaning from based on the perspective of their understanding and experience which is related to that phenomenon. The way that these two maps synergize into something that enables an observer to map concepts of greater complexity demonstrates what the synergetic potential of the two maps is - we currently have only realized and actualized a portion of the total synergetic potential. There is a wide range of vocal possibility left and an even wider range of as-of-yet undescribed phenomena.

Mathematics is map which represents a forked morphism of language - while it now serves a different purpose than a spoken or written language, it itself is a language which can be spoken or written as well. At some point the need to map the words of a language that represented numeric values and the possible operations between them to a more abstract form which was more efficient to communicate (but more limited in the dimensionality of what it could describe) arose. Over time more synergies between the symbols and what they represented were observed and the perspective of mathematics evolved into what it is today - still separate from language yet both heavily synergetic to an observer who can perceive both.
